<chapter id="h2-basics"
><title
>성경 공부의 기초들</title>

<section id="h2-basics-purpose">
<title
>성경에 접근하는 우리의 목적</title>
<para
>Jn.5:39-40<quote
>You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and it is these that bear witness of Me; and you are unwilling to come to Me, that you may have life.</quote
> </para>

<para
>The chief purpose of the book is to bring us to the Person. Martin Luther said <quote
>we go to the cradle only for the sake of the baby</quote
>; just so in Bible study, we do it not for its own sake but for fellowship with God. </para>
<blockquote
><attribution
>John R.W. Stott, <emphasis
>Christ the Controversialist</emphasis
>, InterVarsity Press 1978, pp.97, 104.</attribution>
<para
>The Jews to whom Jesus spoke [...] imagined that to possess Scripture was tantamount to possessing life. Hillel used to say, &quot;He who has gotten to himself words of Torah has gotten to himself the life of the world to come.&quot; Their study was an end in itself. In this they were grievously deceived. [...]</para>
<para
>성경을 단지 읽기 위해 읽는다면 아무 유익이나 이득이 없다, 오직 우리를 예수 그리스도에게 알리는 데에만 소용이 있다. 성경을 읽을 때에 필요한 것은 오직 말씀을 통해 그리스도를 만나고자 하는 간절한 소망뿐이다.</para>
</blockquote>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches"
><title
>하나님의 말씀으로의 접근</title>
<para
>말씀을 공부하고 암송하는 것은 말씀을 세세하게 살펴볼 수 있게 해주고, 말씀을 듣고 읽는 것은 거시적인 관점에서 성경을 볼 수 있도록 해준다. 말씀을 묵상하는 것은 듣고, 읽고, 공부하며 암송하는 것을 모두 포함하여 말씀을 우리 마음판에 새기는 것이다.</para>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches-hear"
><title
>들음(Hear)</title>
<para
>Lk.11:28 <quote
>blessed are those who hear the word of God, and observe it.</quote
></para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches-read"
><title
>읽음(Read)</title>
<para
>Rev.1:3 <quote
>Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of this prophecy [...]</quote
></para>
<para
>1 Tim.4:13 <quote
>give attention to the public reading of Scripture [...]</quote
> </para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches-study"
><title
>공부</title>
<para
>Acts 17:11 <quote
>Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thessalonica, for they received the word with great eagerness, examining the Scriptures daily, to see whether these things were so.</quote
> </para>
<para
>2 Tim.2:15 <quote
>Be diligent [KJV `Study'] to present yourself approved to God as a workman who does not need to be ashamed, handling accurately the word of truth.</quote
></para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches-memorize"
><title
>암송(Memorize)</title>
<para
>Ps.119:11 <quote
>Thy word I have hid in my heart, that I may not sin against Thee.</quote
></para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-approaches-meditate"
><title
>묵상(Meditate)</title>
<para
>Ps.1:2-3 <quote
>But his delight is in the law of the Lord, And in His law he meditates day and night. And he will be like a tree firmly planted by streams of water, Which yields its fruit in its season, And its leaf does not wither; And in whatever he does, he prospers.</quote
> </para>

<para
>이것을 엄지 손가락이 모든 손가락에 닿게 할 수 있는 것처럼, 우리는 4개중 어떤 손가락을 건드리는 것처럼 말씀을 묵상할 수 있다고 하였다. 묵상하는 것은 계시를 받는 생활을 하는 것의 키이다. 새신자들은 말씀을 공부하고 암송하는 것보다 듣고, 읽는 것이 더 필요할 것이다. 그렇게 해서 성경의 전체 메세지의 흐름에 익숙해지게 될 것이다.</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-types"
><title
>성경공부의 유형들</title>
<section id="basics-types-topical"
><title
>주제별 성경공부</title>
<para
>특정 주제(Topic)를 정한뒤, 겹참조와 색인을 참조하여 주제에 맞게 공부한다.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-types-character"
><title
>인물별 성경공부</title>
<para
>성경의 한 인물의 삶을 공부한다, 예. 창 37-50장에서의 요셉의 삶.</para
></section>
<section id="basics-types-expository"
><title
>설명적인(Expository) 성경공부</title>
<para
>특정 구절, 문단, 장 혹은 책을 선택하여 공부한다.</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-interpretation"
><title
>바른 해석의 기본</title>

<section id="h2-basics-interpretation-content"
><title
>내용(Content)</title>
<para
>말하고 있는바가 무엇인가? 원어에서는 어떻게 말하고 있는가? 정의에 주의하라. 그것이 말하고 있지 않은바대로 해석하지마라.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-interpretation-context"
><title
>문맥(Context)</title>
<para
>What do the verses around it say? &quot;Context is king&quot; is the rule -- the passage must make sense within the structure of the entire passage and book.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-interpretation-cross"
><title
>겹참조(Cross-reference)</title>
<para
>성경의 다른 부분에서는 이 주제에 관하여 어떻게 말하고 있는가? 하나님은 스스로 모순되지 않으신 분입니다. 그래서 우리의 해석은 다른 말씀에 비춰봐서도 바로 설 수 있어야 합니다.</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-expository"
><title
>마태복음 6:1-18을 본문으로 설명적인(Expository) 성경 공부 해보기</title>
<para
>마태복음 6:1-18을 공부해봅시다. 본문을 읽으시고, 전체 장을 요약하는 주제 문장을 찾으십시오. 찾으셨습니까? 그 장의 다른 부분들을 골라서 그것들이 주제문장과 연관되어 있는지 테스트 해보십시오. 찾았으면, 아웃라인에 로마숫자 1 하고 주제문장을 써넣으십시오:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperroman">
	<listitem
>Beware of practicing your righteousness before men to be noticed</listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>What does <quote
>practicing your righteousness</quote
> mean? Does the passage give any examples? What area of our lives is being addressed? <emphasis
>Our motives!</emphasis
> What sub-headings develop this thought?</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
	<listitem
>When you give</listitem>
 	<listitem
>When you fast</listitem>
 	<listitem
>When you pray</listitem>
</orderedlist>

<para
>우리의 의를 연습하는 잘못된 방법들을 피할 수 있는 방법들로 아웃라인을 채우십시오:</para>

<orderedlist numeration="upperalpha">
  <listitem
>When you give <orderedlist numeration="loweralpha">
	     <listitem
>don't sound a trumpet. (how might someone <quote
>sound a trumpet</quote
> today?)</listitem>
     	<listitem
>do it secretly.</listitem>
		<listitem
>etc.</listitem>
	</orderedlist>
  </listitem>
</orderedlist>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-worksheet"
><title
>워크시트(Worksheet): 색인(Concordance)을 사용하는 법</title>

<section id="h2-basics-worksheet-select"
><title
>특정 구절 찾기</title>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
>문장의 핵심 단어나 가장 특이한 단어를 뽑는다.</listitem>
	<listitem
>가나다(알파벳) 순으로 정리한다.</listitem>
 	<listitem
>필요한 구절을 찾을때까지 리스트를 따라내려가본다.</listitem>
</orderedlist>
	
<para
>Find these verses: <orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><quote
>Faithful are the wounds of a friend</quote
></listitem>
	<listitem
><quote
>We are ambassadors of Christ.</quote
></listitem>
	<listitem
>The story of the rich man and Lazarus.</listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para>

</section>

<section id="h2-basics-worksheet-study"
><title
>주제별 성경공부 하기 </title>
<para
>Let's say you wanted to do a study of the word &quot;redemption.&quot; First you would look up that word in the concordance and look up references listed for it. Then you could look up related words and references listed for them, e.g. &quot;redeem, redeemed, ransom,&quot; even &quot;buy&quot; or &quot;bought.&quot; </para>
</section>


<section id="h2-basics-worksheet-clarify"
><title
>헬라어와 히브리어 원문의 단어 의미를 찾아보아 의미를 명확히 하기</title>
<para
>What if you noticed a contradiction in the KJV between Mt.7:1 <quote
>Judge not lest you be judged</quote
> and 1 Cor.2:15 <quote
>He that is spiritual judgeth all things.</quote
> Maybe there are two different Greek words here, both being translated &quot;judge&quot; in English? (We're using Strong's from here out.) </para>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
	<listitem
><para
>Look up &quot;judge&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>마 7:1로 가보자. 오른쪽의 번호가 2919이다. 이것은 헬라어 단어 참조 번호이다. 번호를 적어놓는다.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>Now look up &quot;judgeth&quot;.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>고전 2:15로 가보자. 번호는 350이다.</para
></listitem>
	<listitem
><para
>헬라어 사전으로 가보자. (신약에서의 원어는 헬라어이며, 구약에서는 히브리어란 것을 알아두자.) 2919의 의미를 350의 의미와 비교해보고 답을 얻자! </para
></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</section>

<section id="h2-basics-worksheet-names"
><title
>이름의 의미들을 찾기</title>
<para
>헬라어나 히브리어의 이름의 의미를 찾았던 방식과 같다. </para>
<para
>이 이름들을 확인하고 의미들을 적어넣는다.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem
>나발(Nabal)</listitem>
<listitem
>아비가일(Abigail)</listitem>
<listitem
>여호수아(Joshua)</listitem>
<listitem
>바나바(Barnabus)</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

</section
> </section>
</chapter>
