<chapter id="h2-rules"
><title
>성경 해석의 법칙 (Hermeneutics)</title>
<para
>앞에서 "3가지 C"에 대해 살펴보았다: 내용(content), 문맥(context), 겹참조(cross-reference). 이제 이것을 원저자(와 하나님당신)의 저술 의도를 알아보는 성서 해석학적인 것으로 깊이 확장하려 한다. 많은 적용이 가능한 반면, 한가지 해석만이 가능하다. 성경에서는 말씀을 사사로이 풀 수 없다고 말씀하고 있다. (벧후 1:20 KJV <emphasis
>"먼저 알 것은 경의 모든 예언은 사사로이 풀 것이 아니니"</emphasis
>) Certain rules are helps toward discovering the correct meaning; by ignoring these rules people have brought much trouble on themselves and their followers. 벧후.3:16 <emphasis
>"...in which are some things hard to understand, which the untaught and unstable distort, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction."</emphasis
></para>
<para
>어떻게하면 원저자의 본래 의도된 의미를 발견할 수 있는가? 당신에게 의미가 명확하지 않은 특정한 구절을 끄집어 냈다고 하자. 어떻게 그것을 연구할 것인가? 다음의 규칙들을 명심하라:</para>

<section id="h2-rules-exact"
><title
>규칙 1 - 단어의 정확한 뜻에 의거해서 해석하라.</title>
<para
>좀 더 나은 해석을 하는 것보다 정확하고, 원문의 의미를 따르는 것이 중요하다. 다음의 단계를 따라서 핵심 단어들의 정확한 의미를 찾도록 하라:</para>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-definition"
><title
>단계 1) 정의(Definition)</title>
<para
>헬라어나 히브리어 사전의 정의를 찾아보라. 동사의 경우, 시제도 중요하다.</para
></section>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-crossref"
><title
>단계 2) 겹참조(Cross-reference)</title>
<para
>말씀들을 서로 비교하여보라. Seeing how the same Greek or Hebrew word (not the English word) is used in scripture may clarify or throw new light on the definition. How does the same author use this word elsewhere? Other authors? Your reference tools may give you uses of the word in non-biblical documents, as well. Why do we have to go to the original languages; why isn't the English word good enough? BECAUSE MORE THAN ONE GREEK WORD MAY BE TRANSLATED INTO THE SAME ENGLISH WORD, AND THE GREEK WORDS MAY HAVE DIFFERENT SHADES OF MEANING.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-crossref-ex1a"
><title
>예 1A</title>
<para
>요 20:17 <emphasis
>"나를 만지지 말라"</emphasis
> (KJV) sounds harsh, doesn't it? Sounds like Jesus doesn't want to be touched now that He is risen, that He is too holy or something. But that doesn't seem right, so let's look it up in Spiros Zodhiates' <emphasis
>The Complete Word Study New Testament</emphasis
> (AMG Publishers, 1991).</para>
<para
>정의: Turning to 요 20:17, above the word "Touch" we see "pim680." The letters give us a code for the part of speech, and the number refers to Strong's dictionary reference. Let's look up the definition (p. 879). "680. Haptomai; from hapto (681), touch. Refers to such handling of an object as to exert a modifying influence upon it... Distinguished from pselaphao (5584), which actually only means to touch the surface of something. " Now look up "pim." The grammar codes in Zodhiates come right after Revelation; on p. 849 we see that pim stands for "present imperative active (80)". On p.857, "Present Imperative. In the active voice, it may indicate a command to do something in the future which involves continuous or repeated action or, when it is negated, a command to stop doing something. " This is a negative command, so it is to stop doing something that is already occuring. So, what have we found?</para>
<para
><emphasis
>MARY IS ALREADY CLINGING TO JESUS, AND HE IS SAYING TO STOP HOLDING HIM!</emphasis
></para>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-exact-crossref-ex1b"
><title
>예 1B</title>
<para
>야고보서 5:14에서, <emphasis
>병든자가 있느냐?..교회의 장로들을 청할 것이요. 그들은 주의 이름으로 기름을 바르며 위하여 기도할지니라</emphasis
>. 이 기름바름(anointing)은 무엇인가?</para>
<para
>aleipho (218)의 정의 - "to oil" (Strong's); but we also have another Greek word translated "anoint", chrio (5548) - "to smear or rub with oil, i.e. to consecrate to an office or religious service" (Strong's). Since it's a verb, consider the tense also, "apta" aorist participle active. "The aorist participle expresses simple action, as opposed to continuous action...When its relaitonship to the main verb is temporal, it usually signifies action prior to that of the main verb." (Zodhiates p.851)</para>

<screen
>aleipho의 겹참조(Cross-references):
  마 6:17 너는 금식할 때에 머리에 기름을 바르고 얼굴을 씻으라
  막.16:1 [여인들이(the women)] 예수께 바르기 위하여 향품을 사다 두었다가.
  막.6:13 ...많은 병인에게 기름을 발라 고치더라.
  눅.7:38 ...그 발에 입맞추고 향유를 부으니
  요.12:3 마리아는...예수의 발에 붓고 자기 머리털로 그의 발을 씻으니...
chrio의 겹참조(Cross-references):
  누.4:18 주의 성령이 내게 임하셨으니 이는...내게 기름을 부으시고...전파하며..."
  행 4:27 하나님의 기름부으신...예수
  행 10:38 하나님이 나사렛 예수에게 성경과 능력을 기름붓듯 하셨으매
  고후.1:21 ...우리에게 기름을 부으신 이는 하나님이시니
</screen>

<para
>So what's the difference between aleipho and chrio? Look back over the cross-references and the definitions, and sum up the difference: ALEIPHO IS A PRACTICAL USE OF OIL AND CHRIO IS A SPIRITUAL </para>

<para
>As an illustration (although the word is not used) of the practical use of oil at that time, when the good Samaritan cared for the man beat up by robbers he poured oil and wine in the wound. So oil had a medicinal use in Jesus' day. </para>
<para
>Now let's apply what we just learned by this word study to James 5:14 <emphasis
>"Is any among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord."</emphasis
> Is "anointing" spiritual or practical? Practical!</para>
<para
>And the tense in Greek, the aorist participle, would be better translated "having anointed," so the order is the anointing first, then the prayer ("in the name of the Lord"refers to the prayer, not the anointing). James 5 is saying that the elders should give the sick person medicine and pray for him in the name of the Lord. Doesn't that express a beautiful balance of practical and spiritual in our God! </para>
</section>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-context">
<title
>규칙 2 - 성경적인 문맥에 의거해서 해석하라</title>
<para
>성경 해석은 다른 성경과의 조화 속에서 이루어져야 한다. What do the verses on each side say? What is the theme of the chapter? the book? Does your interpretation fit with these? If not, it is flawed. Usually, the context supplies what we need to correctly interpret the passage. Context is key. If confusion remains as to the meaning after we have interpreted the text within its context, we have to look further.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2a"
><title
>예 2A</title>
<para
>In a previous lesson we considered 요 3:5 <emphasis
>"born of water and the Spirit."</emphasis
> In context, what is the water under discussion here?</para>
<para
>Water baptism is not under discussion here, which would be a big switch from the subject being discussed by Jesus and Nicodemus. Watch out for a sudden change of topic, it may be a clue that your interpretation has been derailed! The water is the amniotic fluid, "born of water" = natural birth.</para>
</section>
<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2b"
><title
>예 2B</title>
<para
>고전 14:34 <emphasis
>"Let the women keep silent in the churches"</emphasis
> has to be taken within the biblical context of 고전 11:5 <emphasis
>"every woman...while praying or prophesying..."</emphasis
></para>
</section>
<section id="h2-rules-context-ex2c"
><title
>예 2C</title>
<para
>행 2:38 <emphasis
>And Peter said to them, "Repent, and let each of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins..."</emphasis
> Is this teaching baptismal regeneration? If this was the only verse of scripture we had, we would have to conclude that. But in the light of the clear teaching elsewhere that regeneration happens by faith in Christ, we have to interpret it otherwise. Peter is urging baptism as a way for his hearers to respond to the gospel. If baptism were the pathway to being born again, how could Paul write 고전 1:17 <emphasis
>"For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel"</emphasis
>? </para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest">
<title
>규칙 3 - 역사와 문화적인 배경의 문맥에서 해석하라</title>
<para
>At first we are not asking "What does it mean to me?" but "What did it mean to the original readers?"; later we can ask, "What does it mean to me?" We have to take into account the historical and cultural background of the author and the recipients.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest-ex3a"
><title
>예 3A</title
><para
>"3 days &amp; 3 nights" (마 12:40) have led some to come up with a "Wednesday crucifixion theory," esp. the cult of Armstrongism. How could Jesus die on Friday afternoon and rise Sunday morning yet "be raised on the third day" (마 16:21)? Exact meanings of "three" or "days" won't help explain the apparent contradiction.</para>
<para
>We need an historical tidbit: Jews counted any part of a day as a full day, as we would count buckets of water (if there were six and one-half buckets of water, we would say there were 7 buckets of water even if one was only partly full). So to the Jewish mind, any part of a day counted as a full day, and days started at 6 p.m. and ended at 6 a.m. 금요일 3 p.m. - 6 p.m. = 첫째날. 금요일 6 p.m. - 토요일 6 p.m. = 둘째날. 토요일 6 p.m. - 일요일 5 or so a.m. = 셋째날. 문화적인 배경에 의거해서 해석하는 것은 오류에 빠지는 것을 방지해준다.</para>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-hcontest-ex3b"
><title
>예 3B</title
><para
>창 15:7-21. The historical context is that cutting animals in two and then walking between the pieces was the normal way of entering a contract in Abraham's day. Both parties walked between, taking the pledge that dismemberment would happen to them if they didn't live up to their part of the contract. But in this case only God goes thru, making it a unilateral covenant.</para>
</section>
</section>

<section id="h2-rules-normal"
><title
>규칙 4 - 언어에서 단어의 일반적인 사용에 따라 해석하라</title>
<para
>Let literal language be literal and figurative language be figurative. And watch out for idioms, which have special meanings.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-normal-ex4a"
><title
>예 4A</title
><para
>마 6:23의 "눈이 나쁘면(evil eye)" </para>
<para
>규칙 1, definition of "evil" and "eye" - no help here. 규칙 2, context: seems to confuse us even more. It doesn't seem to fit with what goes before and after! This should tip us off that we aren't understanding it rightly!!</para>
<para
>What we have here is a Hebrew idiom, "evil eye." Let's look up other uses of this idiom: 마 20:15 "<emphasis
>내 것을 가지고 내 뜻대로 할 것이 아니냐 내가 선하므로[lit."good"] 네가 악하게[lit."evil"] 보느냐?</emphasis
>" We find that having an "evil eye" is a Hebrew idiom for being stingy or envious. Now go back to Mt.6 and notice how this understanding ties in so perfectly to the context.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-normal-ex4b"
><title
>예 4B</title>
<para
>사 59:1 "<emphasis
>여호와의 손이 짧아 구원치 못하심도 아니요;</emphasis
>" 신 33:27 "<emphasis
>그 영원하신 팔이 네 아래 있도다</emphasis
>" References to body parts of God are used by Latter-Day Saints to prove that God was once a man just as we are. Once they convince people of that, they go on to teach that we can become God just like He is! At a lecture he was giving, a group of Mormon elders challenged Walter Martin (author of <emphasis
>Kingdom of the Cults</emphasis
>) with an enumeration of verses like these. Dr. Martin then asked the Mormons to read one more scripture: Ps.91:4 "<emphasis
>He will cover you with His feathers; And under His wings shalt thou trust.</emphasis
>" W.M. said, "By the same rules of interpretation that you just proved God to be a man, you just proved that He is a bird." The Mormons had to laugh as they realised the ridiculousness of their position. </para>
</section>
</section>
</section>
<section id="h2-rules-parables"
><title
>규칙 5 - Understand the purpose of parables and the difference between a parable and an allegory</title>
<para
>An allegory is: A STORY WHERE EACH ELEMENT HAS A MEANING </para>
<para
>Every parable is an allegory, 참인가 거짓인가?</para>

<para
>Some parables are allegories, for instance, the parable of the sower is an allegory: the seed is the word of God, the thorns are worries and greed, etc. But most parables are not allegories but simply stories to illustrate one point. It's dangerous to get our doctrine from parables; they can be twisted to say all sorts of things. We need to get our doctrine from clear scriptures that lay it out; then if a parable illustrates that, fine.</para>

<section id="h2-rules-parables-ex5a"
><title
>예 5A</title>
<para
>The parable of the widow with the unrighteous judge in Lk.18:1-8. This story illustrates one lesson: boldness in prayer. If we draw it into an allegory, what do we have?</para>
<para
>All sorts of violence happens to the meanings: God is reluctant to protect the rights of widows, prayer "bothers" Him, etc.</para
></section>

<section id="h2-rules-parables-ex5b"
><title
>예 5B</title>
<para
>The parable of the unrighteous steward in 눅 16:1-9. 우화의 요점은 무엇인가? 그것은 비유인가? </para>
<para
>The steward is commended for only one thing, his shrewdness in using what he had to prepare for a time when he wouldn't have it. But he is not commended for his unethical behavior in cheating his master. </para>
</section>

</section>
</chapter>
